dual-stack blog (#12253)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2023/experimental-dual-stack/index.md

have landed in the Istio 1.17 release (e.g. [extra source addresses on inbound clusters](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/41618)).

The Envoy API changes made by the team can be found at their site at [Listener addresses](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/listener/v3/listener.proto.html?highlight=additional_addresses) and [bind config](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/core/v3/address.proto#config-core-v3-bindconfig). Making sure we can have proper support at both the downstream and upstream connection for Envoy is important for realizing
dual-stack support.

In total the team has submitted over a dozen PRs to Envoy and are working on at least a half dozen more to make Envoy adoption of
dual stack easier for Istio.

Meanwhile, on the Istio side you can track the progress in [Issue #40394](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40394).
Progress has slowed down a bit lately as we continue working with Envoy on various issues, however, we are happy to
announce experimental support for dual stack in Istio 1.17!

> ## Enabling Dual Stack in Istio 1.17

Reviewer: You cover more than enabling and are showing a demo, so maybe:
```suggestion
## A Quick Experiment using Dual Stack
```
I guess you use experiment below.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl apply --namespace dual-stack -f {{< github_file >}}/samples/tcp-echo/tcp-echo-dual-stack.yaml
    $ kubectl apply --namespace ipv4 -f {{< github_file >}}/samples/tcp-echo/tcp-echo-ipv4.yaml
    $ kubectl apply --namespace ipv6 -f {{< github_file >}}/samples/tcp-echo/tcp-echo-ipv6.yaml
    {{< /text >}}

1. Create sleep deployment in the default namespace:

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl apply -f {{< github_file >}}/master/samples/sleep/sleep.yaml
    {{< /text >}}

1. Verify the traffic:

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl exec -it "$(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -- sh -c "echo dualstack | nc tcp-echo 9000"
    hello dualstack
    $ kubectl exec -it "$(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -- sh -c "echo ipv4 | nc tcp-echo.ipv4 9000"
    hello ipv4
    $ kubectl exec -it "$(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -- sh -c "echo ipv6 | nc tcp-echo.ipv6 9000"
    hello ipv6
    {{< /text >}}

Now you can experiment with dual-stack services in your environment!

## Important Changes to Listeners and Endpoints

> For the above experiment, you'll notice changes are made listeners and routes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the above experiment, you'll notice changes are made to listeners and routes:
```

> For the above experiment, you'll notice changes are made listeners and routes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the above experiment, you'll notice changes are made to listeners and routes:
```

{{< /text >}}

You will see listeners are now bound to multiple addresses, but only for dual stack services. Other services will only
be listening on a single IP address.

{{< text json >}}
        "name": "fd00:10:96::f9fc_9000",
        "address": {
            "socketAddress": {
                "address": "fd00:10:96::f9fc",
                "portValue": 9000
            }
        },
        "additionalAddresses": [
            {
                "address": {
                    "socketAddress": {
                        "address": "10.96.106.11",
                        "portValue": 9000
                    }
                }
            }
        ],
{{< /text >}}

Virtual inbound addresses are now also configured to listen on both `0.0.0.0` and `[::]`.

{{< text json >}}
    "name": "virtualInbound",
    "address": {
        "socketAddress": {
            "address": "0.0.0.0",
            "portValue": 15006
        }
    },
    "additionalAddresses": [
        {
            "address": {
                "socketAddress": {
                    "address": "::",
                    "portValue": 15006
                }
            }
        }
    ],
{{< /text >}}

> While Envoy's endpoints now are configured to route to both IPv4 and IPv6:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Envoy's endpoints now are configured to route to both IPv4 and IPv6:
```
There is no continuation for the while.

---
title: "Support for Dual Stack Kubernetes Clusters"
description: "Experimental support for Dual Stack Kubernetes Clusters."
publishdate: 2023-03-02
attribution: "Steve Zhang (Intel), Alex Xu (Intel), Iris Ding (Intel), Jacob Delgado (F5), Ying-chun Cai (formerly F5)"
keywords: [dual-stack]
---

Over the past year, both Intel and F5 have collaborated on an effort to bring support for
[Kubernetes Dual-Stack networking](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack/) to Istio.

## Background

The journey has taken us longer than anticipated and we continue to have work to do. The team initially started with a design based
on a reference implementation from F5. The design led to an [RFC](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oT6pmRhOw7AtsldU0-HbfA0zA26j9LYiBD_eepeErsQ/edit?usp=sharing) that caused us to re-examine our approach. Notably, there were concerns about memory and performance issues that the community wanted
to be addressed before implementation.

> ## Experimental Dual Stack Branch

Reviewer 3: I would prefer to remove this section in the blog - i think it generated more confusion. Not sure if this dev details would be interesting to users given now you do want people to use 1.17 branch.

Reviewer 4: Removed the experimental branch section

Reviewer 3: Thanks!

have landed in the Istio 1.17 release (e.g. [extra source addresses on inbound clusters](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/41618)).

The Envoy API changes made by the team can be found at their site at [Listener addresses](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/listener/v3/listener.proto.html?highlight=additional_addresses) and [bind config](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/core/v3/address.proto#config-core-v3-bindconfig). Making sure we can have proper support at both the downstream and upstream connection for Envoy is important for realizing
dual-stack support.

In total the team has submitted over a dozen PRs to Envoy and are working on at least a half dozen more to make Envoy adoption of
dual stack easier for Istio.

Meanwhile, on the Istio side you can track the progress in [Issue #40394](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40394).
Progress has slowed down a bit lately as we continue working with Envoy on various issues, however, we are happy to
announce experimental support for dual stack in Istio 1.17!

## Enabling Dual Stack in Istio 1.17

> 1. Enable dual stack experimental support on Istio 1.17.0+ with the following:

Reviewer 3: 1.17 also supports HBONE, how is dual stack working w/ HBONE?

Reviewer 5: yep, givem HBONE is at experimental phase, dual stack work w/HBONE is not covered in this blog.

Reviewer 3: ok, sounds good not  mentioning it.

The Envoy API changes made by the team can be found at their site at [Listener addresses](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/listener/v3/listener.proto.html?highlight=additional_addresses)
and [bind config](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/core/v3/address.proto#config-core-v3-bindconfig).
Making sure we can have proper support at both the downstream and upstream connection for Envoy is important for realizing
dual-stack support.

In total the team has submitted over a dozen PRs to Envoy and are working on at least a half dozen more to make Envoy adoption of
dual stack easier for Istio.

Meanwhile, on the Istio side you can track the progress in [Issue #40394](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40394).
Progress has slowed down a bit lately as we continue working with Envoy on various issues, however, we are happy to
announce experimental support for dual stack in Istio 1.17!

## Enabling Dual Stack in Istio 1.17

To enable dual stack experimental support you must install Istio 1.17.0+ with the following:

> ```shell

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< text bash >}}
```

$ istioctl install -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
spec:
  meshConfig:
    defaultConfig:
      proxyMetadata:
        ISTIO_AGENT_DUAL_STACK: "true"
  values:
    pilot:
      env:
        ISTIO_DUAL_STACK: "true"
EOF
```

To verify your installation let us create 3 namespaces and install the `tcp-echo` server to them:
* `dual-stack`: `tcp-echo` will listen on both an IPv4 and IPv6 address.
* `ipv4`: `tcp-echo` will listen on only an IPv4 address.
* `ipv6`: `tcp-echo` will listen on only an IPv6 address.

```shell
$ kubectl create namespace dual-stack
$ kubectl create namespace ipv4
$ kubectl create namespace ipv6

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< /text >}}
```

Let us enable sidecar injection on all of those namespaces as well as the default namespace:

```shell
$ kubectl label --overwrite namespace default istio-injection=enabled
$ kubectl label --overwrite namespace dual-stack istio-injection=enabled
$ kubectl label --overwrite namespace ipv4 istio-injection=enabled
$ kubectl label --overwrite namespace ipv6 istio-injection=enabled
```

Let's apply `tcp-echo` to those namespaces:

> ```shell

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< text bash >}}
```

$ kubectl apply --namespace dual-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/master/samples/tcp-echo/tcp-echo-dual-stack.yaml
$ kubectl apply --namespace ipv4 -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/master/samples/tcp-echo/tcp-echo-ipv4.yaml
$ kubectl apply --namespace ipv6 -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/master/samples/tcp-echo/tcp-echo-ipv6.yaml
```

To the default namespace let's apply sleep:

```shell
$ kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/master/samples/sleep/sleep.yaml
```

Let us communicate with the `tcp-echo` servers.

> ```shell

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< text bash >}}
```

$ kubectl exec -it "$(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -- sh -c "echo dualstack | nc tcp-echo 9000"
hello dualstack
$ kubectl exec -it "$(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -- sh -c "echo ipv4 | nc tcp-echo.ipv4 9000"
hello ipv4
$ kubectl exec -it "$(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -- sh -c "echo ipv6 | nc tcp-echo.ipv6 9000"
hello ipv6

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< /text >}}
```

Now you can experiment with dual-stack services in your environment!

## Important Changes to Listeners and Endpoints

For the above experiment, you'll notice changes are made listeners and routes:

> ```shell

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< text bash >}}
```

$ istioctl proxy-config listeners "$(kubectl get pod -n dual-stack -l app=tcp-echo -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -n dual-stack --port 9000

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< /text >}}
```

You will see listeners are now bound to multiple addresses, but only for dual stack services. Other services will only
be listening on a single IP address.

> ```json

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< text json >}}
```

        "name": "fd00:10:96::f9fc_9000",
        "address": {
            "socketAddress": {
                "address": "fd00:10:96::f9fc",
                "portValue": 9000
            }
        },
        "additionalAddresses": [
            {
                "address": {
                    "socketAddress": {
                        "address": "10.96.106.11",
                        "portValue": 9000
                    }
                }
            }
        ],

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< /text >}}
```

Virtual inbound addresses are now also configured to listen on both `0.0.0.0` and `[::]`.

> ```json

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< text json >}}
```

    "name": "virtualInbound",
    "address": {
        "socketAddress": {
            "address": "0.0.0.0",
            "portValue": 15006
        }
    },
    "additionalAddresses": [
        {
            "address": {
                "socketAddress": {
                    "address": "::",
                    "portValue": 15006
                }
            }
        }
    ],

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< /text >}}
```

While Envoy's endpoints now are configured to route to both IPv4 and IPv6:

> ```shell

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< text bash >}}
```

$ istioctl proxy-config endpoints "$(kubectl get pod -n sleep -l app=tcp-echo -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" --port 9000
ENDPOINT                 STATUS      OUTLIER CHECK     CLUSTER
10.244.0.19:9000         HEALTHY     OK                outbound|9000||tcp-echo.ipv4.svc.cluster.local
10.244.0.26:9000         HEALTHY     OK                outbound|9000||tcp-echo.dual-stack.svc.cluster.local
fd00:10:244::1a:9000     HEALTHY     OK                outbound|9000||tcp-echo.dual-stack.svc.cluster.local
fd00:10:244::18:9000     HEALTHY     OK                outbound|9000||tcp-echo.ipv6.svc.cluster.local

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< /text >}}
```

---
title: "Support for Dual Stack Kubernetes Clusters"
description: "Experimental support for Dual Stack Kubernetes Clusters."
publishdate: 2023-02-20
attribution: "Steve Zhang (Intel), Alex Xu (Intel), Iris Ding (Intel), Jacob Delgado (F5), Ying-chun Cai (formerly F5)"
keywords: [dual-stack]
---

Over the past year, both Intel and F5 have collaborated on an effort to bring support for
[Kubernetes Dual-Stack networking](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack/) to Istio.

## Background

The journey has taken us longer than anticipated and we continue to have work to do. The team initially started with a design based
on a reference implementation from F5. The design led to an [RFC](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oT6pmRhOw7AtsldU0-HbfA0zA26j9LYiBD_eepeErsQ/edit?usp=sharing) that
caused us to re-examine our approach. Notably, there were concerns about memory and performance issues that the community wanted
to be addressed before implementation.

> ## Experimental Dual Stack branch

Reviewer 6: Nit your capitalization is not consistent in your headings.

While the team was re-evaluating the options, we created a new branch, [experimental-dual-stack]({{< github_raw >}}/tree/experimental-dual-stack),
to experiment and implement the reference design. We will detail how to use and install artifacts
from that branch in an upcoming blog, however, be aware that its initial intent was to learn how to approach development
in a way that we can implement a big impacting feature within Istio without causing regressions to single stack clusters.
It was also branched between Istio 1.13 and 1.14 and hasn't kept up to date with the master branch. Using artifacts built
from this branch would be considered highly experimental. While the branch builds locally, it fails the CI pipeline when
another PR is added. With that said, there are still people and companies that are using artifacts from this branch

> in both staging and production environments.

Reviewer 6: This blog leaves me wondering should I be using only 1.17 or only this experimental branch or maybe it should depend on my use case?   I had a similar set of questions (master vs. experimental branch) when trying to do some dual-stack testing recently.   Assuming you want nearly everyone using 1.17 then maybe just change the wording here to indicate this is historical and remove any references to people using the artifacts.   That can be left unsaid.

> The original design was created with customer requirements that specified client originating IPv4 requests should be proxied over IPv4, and the same for an originating IPv6 requests to be satisfied over IPv6 (we will refer to this as native IP family going forward). To do this, we initially had to duplicate Envoy configuration for listeners, clusters, routes and endpoints. Given that many people already experience Envoy memory and CPU consumption issues, early feedback wanted us to completely re-evaluate this approach. Many proxies transparently handle outbound dual-stack traffic regardless of how the traffic was originated. Much of the earliest feedback was to implement the same behavior in Istio and Envoy.

Reviewer 6: This might be extending the scope of this blog more than you really want but it would be great to provide a bit of explanation on how a user configuration might differ between dual-stack vs. IPv6 only vs IPv6 only.   It you include some more information on how to use it I think you will cover some of this naturally.

and [supported multiple addresses per listener](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/11184). Alex Xu has also
been working fervently to get long outstanding issues resolved, with the ability for Envoy to have a
[smarter way to pick endpoints for dual-stack](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/21640). Some of these improvements
to Envoy, such as the ability to [enable socket options on multiple addresses](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/pull/23496),
have landed in the Istio 1.17 release (e.g. [extra source addresses on inbound clusters](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/41618)).

The Envoy API changes made by the team can be found at their site at [Listener addresses](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/listener/v3/listener.proto.html?highlight=additional_addresses)
and [bind config](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/core/v3/address.proto#config-core-v3-bindconfig).
Making sure we can have proper support at both the downstream and upstream connection for Envoy is important for realizing
dual-stack support.

> In total the team has submitted over a dozen PRs to Envoy and are working on at least a half dozen more to make Envoy adoption of

Reviewer 6: For anyone wanting to try the feature this is a little scary.  Are these big things or little things?  It is just to make things easier or are some use cases broken? If there is a running list somewhere of what is in progress adding a link might help.   If not just changing the wording to make this less scary may help.

Author: It's preferable for people to use the 1.17 branch. The experimental branch is out of date. There may still continue to be things to learn from it, however.

dual stack easier for Istio.

Meanwhile, on the Istio side you can track the progress in [Issue #40394](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40394).
Progress has slowed down a bit lately as we continue working with Envoy on various issues, however, we are happy to

> announce experimental support for dual stack in Istio 1.17!

Reviewer 7: How does a user use it?

Reviewer 3: Felt these are status report - but not so much about how users can use it.  I would prefer blogs more user facing.

Reviewer 3: Also, is the feature merged in Istio 1.17?  Earlier in the blog, it seems to indicate it is still on an exp branch.

Author: I'm rewriting it to include a section on how to use this feature using istioctl and helm along with some examples. It'll be a bit longer. We can decide to break it up into 2 blogs then.

### Get involved

> Plenty of work remains and you are welcome to help us with the remaining tasks needed for dual stack support to get to Alpha [here](https://github.com/istio/enhancements/pull/141).

Reviewer 7: this PR is moving it to experimental

Reviewer 8: Hi @howardjohn, I think this should be the calling other contributor to work together to make dual stack feature to become Alpha status.

Reviewer 7: That PR is specifically promoting to Experimental though. Maybe link to features/dual-stack-support.md

Reviewer 3: agreed, worth to highlight next step is alpha to avoid confusion.

For instance, Iris Ding (Intel) and Li Chun (Intel) are already working with the community for getting redirection of

> network traffic for ambient and we are hoping to have ambient support dual stack for its upcoming alpha release in

Reviewer 3: could you share some future thoughts on ambient for this besides traffic redirection? Does this change ztunnel configuration as well?

Author: This is an area I'm not too familiar with. @zhlsunshine and @irisdingbj do you have any more thoughts?

Reviewer 8: I think @irisdingbj can provide more info about this.

Istio 1.18.

We would love your feedback and if you are eager to work with us please stop by our slack channel, #dual-stack within
the [Istio Slack](https://slack.istio.io/).

_Thank you to the team that has worked on Istio dual-stack!_

> * Intel: [Steve Zhang](https://github.com/zhlsunshine), [Alex Xu](https://github.com/soulxu), [Iris Ding](https://github.com/irisdingbj)

Reviewer 7: nit: make the `attribution` line have only the actual blog author or remove this

Reviewer 3: given blog authors are the team - seems no need to have `attribution` in this case. We did it for ambient as there were 20+ people contributed to it.

Reviewer 9: maybe not a big matter,  by this we can motivate more contributors to work on new features

---

> title: "Support of Dual Stack Kubernetes Clusters"

Reviewer: Should it be of or for? You use for in the description.

description: "Experimental and Alpha support for Dual Stack Kubernetes Clusters."

> publishdate: 2023-002-07T13:00:00-06:00

Reviewer: ```suggestion
publishdate: 2023-02-07T13:00:00-06:00
```
As I don't see this at the top of the blogs in netlify.

attribution: "Steve Zhang (Intel), Alex Xu (Intel), Iris Ding (Intel), Jacob Delgado (F5), Ying-chun Cai (formerly F5)"
keywords: [dual-stack]
---

Over the past year, both Intel and F5 have collaborated on an effort to bring support for
[Kubernetes Dual-Stack networking](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack/) to Istio.

## Background

> The journey has taken us longer than anticipated and we continue to have work to do. Initially started with a design based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The journey has taken us longer than anticipated and we continue to have work to do. The team initially started with a design based
```
Not sure if it should be The team or maybe We.

on a reference design implementation from F5. The design lead to an [RFC](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oT6pmRhOw7AtsldU0-HbfA0zA26j9LYiBD_eepeErsQ/edit?usp=sharing) that
caused us to re-examine our approach. Notably, there were concerns about memory and performance issues that the community wanted
to be addressed before implementation.

## Experimental Dual Stack branch

> While the team was re-evaluating its options we created a new branch, [experimental-dual-stack]({{< github_raw >}}/tree/experimental-dual-stack),

Reviewer: I will say that while that branch builds locally, it fails the CI pipeline if another PR is added.

to experiment and implement the reference design as we continued to learn. We will detail how to use and install artifacts
from that branch in an upcoming blog, however, be aware that its initial intent was to learn how to approach development
in a way that we can implement a big impacting feature within Istio without causing regressions. As such, it would be

> considered highly experimental to use--unit and integration tests do not currently pass--yet there are still people

Reviewer: The bold is not showing up correctly. Maybe:
```suggestion
considered highly experimental to use , --unit and integration tests do not currently pass-- , yet there are still people
```

that are testing and using this in their environment.

A big part of the original design was to duplicate a lot of the Envoy configuration. Notably, the listeners, clusters and routes

> with a new set of endpoints they can be referred to. The original design was created with customer requirements that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with a new set of endpoints they can be referenced. The original design was created with customer requirements that
```

specified client originating IPv4 requests should be proxied over IPv4, and the same for an originating IPv6 to be
satisfied over IPv6 (we will refer to this as native IP family going forward).

## Community Feedback

> Much of the feedback provided by the community for the original RFC was to change Envoy to better support dual-stack use cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Much of the feedback provided by the community for the original RFC was to update Envoy to better support dual-stack use cases
```

internally instead of supporting this within Istio. This has led us to a [new design](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15LP2XHpQ71ODkjCVItGacPgzcn19fsVhyE7ruMGXDyU/edit?usp=sharing)

> where we have taken lessons learned as well as feedback and have applied them.

Reviewer: applied them where?

## Current Work

We have worked with the Envoy community to address numerous concerns which is a reason why dual-stack enablement has

> taken us a while to implement. We have [matched IP Family for outbound listener](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/16804)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
taken us a while to implement. We have implemented [matched IP Family for outbound listener](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/16804)
```

and [supported multiple addresses per listener](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/11184). Alex Xu has also

> been working fervently to get long outstanding issues resolve, with the ability for Envoy to have a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
been working fervently to get long outstanding issues resolved, with the ability for Envoy to have a
```

[smarter way to pick endpoints for dual-stack](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/21640). Some of these improvements
to Envoy, such as the ability to [enable socket options on multiple addresses](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/pull/23496),
have landed in the upcoming Istio 1.17 release (e.g. [extra source addresses on inbound clusters](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/41618)).

> The Envoy API changes the team has made can be found under their site at [Listener addresses](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/listener/v3/listener.proto.html?highlight=additional_addresses)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Envoy API changes the team has made can be found at their site at [Listener addresses](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/listener/v3/listener.proto.html?highlight=additional_addresses)
```

and [bind config](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/core/v3/address.proto#config-core-v3-bindconfig).
Making sure we can have proper support at both the downstream and upstream connection for Envoy is important for realizing
dual-stack support.

In total the team has submitted over a dozen PRs to Envoy and are working on a least a half dozen more to make Envoy adoption of
dual stack easier for Istio.

Meanwhile, on the Istio side you can track the progress in [Issue #40394](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40394).
Progress has slowed down a bit lately as we continue working with Envoy on various issues, however, we are hoping to get
this resolved before Istio 1.17 launches in February.

It is our hope that for Istio 1.17 we are able to get rudimentary support for dual-stack working. Iris Ding (Intel) and

> `Li Chun (Intel)` are already working with the community for getting redirection of network traffic for ambient. We will

Reviewer: Is there a reason we are highlighting Li and not Iris? Spelling issue?

Author: It was a spelling issue. Couldn't tell since I could not get the linter working correctly for me.

> announce what changes we have made in Istio 1.17 shortly after its released.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
announce what changes we have made in Istio 1.17 shortly after it is released.
```

### Get involved

> While we do not have a publicly available version of Istio available for download with dual stack capabilities, we are

Reviewer 4: why not publish the blog once 1.17 is released with all the changes? Instead of saying getting ready in 1.17 ?

Reviewer: Especially with the 1.17.0 release hopefully next week.

Author: Ok. I re-worded this and changed the blog date to next Wednesday.

excited to get this done and ready in Istio 1.17 due early 2023.

We would love your feedback and if you are eager to work with us please stop by our slack channel, #dual-stack within
the [Istio Slack](https://slack.istio.io/).

_Thank you to the team that has worked on Istio dual-stack!_
* Intel: [Steve Zhang](https://github.com/zhlsunshine), [Alex Xu](https://github.com/soulxu), [Iris Ding](https://github.com/irisdingbj)
* F5: `Jacob Delgado`

> * `Yingchun Cai` (formerly of F5)

Reviewer: And we are highlighting names here, while we have links above. Change these to links as well? And may need spelling updates?

caused us to re-examine our approach. Notably, there were concerns about memory and performance issues that the community wanted
to be addressed before implementation.

## Experimental Dual Stack branch

While the team was re-evaluating its options we created a new branch, [experimental-dual-stack]({{< github_raw >}}/tree/experimental-dual-stack),
to experiment and implement the reference design as we continued to learn. We will detail how to use and install artifacts
from that branch in an upcoming blog, however, be aware that its initial intent was to learn how to approach development
in a way that we can implement a big impacting feature within Istio without causing regressions. As such, it would be
considered highly experimental to use. While the branch builds locally, it fails the CI pipeline when another PR is added.
With that said, there are still people and companies that are testing and using this within their environment.

A big part of the original design was to duplicate a lot of the Envoy configuration. Notably, the listeners, clusters and routes

> with a new set of endpoints they can be referenced. The original design was created with customer requirements that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with a new set of endpoints that can be referenced. The original design was created with customer requirements that
```

Making sure we can have proper support at both the downstream and upstream connection for Envoy is important for realizing
dual-stack support.

In total the team has submitted over a dozen PRs to Envoy and are working on a least a half dozen more to make Envoy adoption of
dual stack easier for Istio.

Meanwhile, on the Istio side you can track the progress in [Issue #40394](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40394).
Progress has slowed down a bit lately as we continue working with Envoy on various issues, however, we are hoping to get
this resolved before Istio 1.17 launches in February.

It is our hope that for Istio 1.17 we are able to get rudimentary support for dual-stack working. Iris Ding (Intel) and
Li Chun (Intel) are already working with the community for getting redirection of network traffic for ambient. We will
announce what changes we have made in Istio 1.17 shortly after it is released.

### Get involved

While we do not have a publicly available version of Istio available for download with dual stack capabilities there are
ample opportunities for those interesting in using, writing issues and fixing code for getting dual stack support to alpha

> feature status for Istio 1.18.

Reviewer 8: so dual stack will become alpha status for Istio 1.18 not 1.17, Am I right?

Reviewer 8: According to the announcement of 1.17 release here: https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/12633/files, it should be alpha feature in 1.17 release, so I suggest change it.

Author: That's the goal.

> feature status for Istio 1.18.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
feature status for Istio 1.17.
```

Reviewer 8: Hi @jacob-delgado, according to the announcement of 1.17 release here: https://istio.io/latest/news/releases/1.17.x/announcing-1.17/#istio-dual-stack-support, it should be alpha feature in 1.17 release, so I suggest change it.

Reviewer: Just want to make sure the 1.17 release notes are correct. As far as I can tell there is no feature status element for this work. If it's truly alpha we should have an enhancement PR for this so it is correctly represented in the feature table.

Reviewer 8: Hi @ericvn, yes, it makes sense, I think you mean the PR for https://github.com/istio/enhancements, am I right? 
If yes, I will add it

Reviewer 8: Hi @ericvn, there is a PR here: https://github.com/istio/enhancements/pull/141 for the feature status description. Thanks!

Author: I've linked to the enhancements PR.

---
title: "Support for Dual Stack Kubernetes Clusters"

> description: "Experimental and Alpha support for Dual Stack Kubernetes Clusters."

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
description: "Experimental support for Dual Stack Kubernetes Clusters."
```

> publishdate: 2023-02-20T13:00:00-06:00

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
publishdate: 2023-02-20
```

attribution: "Steve Zhang (Intel), Alex Xu (Intel), Iris Ding (Intel), Jacob Delgado (F5), Ying-chun Cai (formerly F5)"
keywords: [dual-stack]
---

Over the past year, both Intel and F5 have collaborated on an effort to bring support for
[Kubernetes Dual-Stack networking](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack/) to Istio.

## Background

The journey has taken us longer than anticipated and we continue to have work to do. The team initially started with a design based

> on a reference design implementation from F5. The design lead to an [RFC](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oT6pmRhOw7AtsldU0-HbfA0zA26j9LYiBD_eepeErsQ/edit?usp=sharing) that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
on a reference implementation from F5. The design led to an [RFC](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oT6pmRhOw7AtsldU0-HbfA0zA26j9LYiBD_eepeErsQ/edit?usp=sharing) that
```

caused us to re-examine our approach. Notably, there were concerns about memory and performance issues that the community wanted
to be addressed before implementation.

## Experimental Dual Stack branch

> While the team was re-evaluating its options we created a new branch, [experimental-dual-stack]({{< github_raw >}}/tree/experimental-dual-stack),

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While the team was re-evaluating the options, we created a new branch, [experimental-dual-stack]({{< github_raw >}}/tree/experimental-dual-stack),
```

to experiment and implement the reference design. We will detail how to use and install artifacts
from that branch in an upcoming blog, however, be aware that its initial intent was to learn how to approach development
in a way that we can implement a big impacting feature within Istio without causing regressions to single stack clusters.
It was also branched between Istio 1.13 and 1.14 and hasn't kept up to date with the master branch. Using artifacts built
from this branch would be considered highly experimental. While the branch builds locally, it fails the CI pipeline when
another PR is added. With that said, there are still people and companies that are using artifacts from this branch
in both staging and production environments.

The original design was created with customer requirements that specified client originating IPv4 requests should be proxied

> over IPv4, and the same for an originating IPv6 to be satisfied over IPv6 (we will refer to this as native IP family going

Reviewer: ```suggestion
over IPv4, and the same for an originating IPv6 requests to be satisfied over IPv6 (we will refer to this as native IP family going
```

forward). To do this initially required us to duplicate Envoy configuration for listeners, clusters, routes and endpoints.

> Given that many people already experience Envoy memory and CPU consumption issues early feedback wanted us to completely

Reviewer: I think this needs a comma:
```suggestion
Given that many people already experience Envoy memory and CPU consumption issues, early feedback wanted us to completely
```

> The original design was created with customer requirements that specified client originating IPv4 requests should be proxied
> over IPv4, and the same for an originating IPv6 requests to be satisfied over IPv6 (we will refer to this as native IP family going
> forward). To do this initially required us to duplicate Envoy configuration for listeners, clusters, routes and endpoints.
> Given that many people already experience Envoy memory and CPU consumption issues, early feedback wanted us to completely
> re-evaluate our approach. Many proxies transparently handle outbound dual-stack traffic regardless of how the the traffic
> was originated so much of the earliest feedback was to implement the same behavior in Istio and Envoy. We needed to
> re-evaluate our approach and design taking in both our requirements and feedback from the community.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The original design was created with customer requirements that specified client originating IPv4 requests should be proxied over IPv4, and the same for an originating IPv6 requests to be satisfied over IPv6 (we will refer to this as native IP family going forward). To do this, we initially had to duplicate Envoy configuration for listeners, clusters, routes and endpoints. Given that many people already experience Envoy memory and CPU consumption issues, early feedback wanted us to completely re-evaluate this approach. Many proxies transparently handle outbound dual-stack traffic regardless of how the traffic was originated. Much of the earliest feedback was to implement the same behavior in Istio and Envoy.
```

Much of the feedback provided by the community for the original RFC was to update Envoy to better support dual-stack use cases
internally instead of supporting this within Istio. This has led us to a [new design](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15LP2XHpQ71ODkjCVItGacPgzcn19fsVhyE7ruMGXDyU/edit?usp=sharing)
where we have taken lessons learned as well as feedback and have applied them to fit a simplified design.

## Support for Dual Stack in Istio 1.17

We have worked with the Envoy community to address numerous concerns which is a reason why dual-stack enablement has
taken us a while to implement. We have implemented [matched IP Family for outbound listener](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/16804)
and [supported multiple addresses per listener](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/11184). Alex Xu has also
been working fervently to get long outstanding issues resolved, with the ability for Envoy to have a
[smarter way to pick endpoints for dual-stack](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/21640). Some of these improvements
to Envoy, such as the ability to [enable socket options on multiple addresses](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/pull/23496),

> have landed in the upcoming Istio 1.17 release (e.g. [extra source addresses on inbound clusters](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/41618)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have landed in the Istio 1.17 release (e.g. [extra source addresses on inbound clusters](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/41618)).
```

> The Envoy API changes the team has made can be found at their site at [Listener addresses](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/listener/v3/listener.proto.html?highlight=additional_addresses)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Envoy API changes made by the team can be found at their site at [Listener addresses](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/listener/v3/listener.proto.html?highlight=additional_addresses)
```

and [bind config](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/core/v3/address.proto#config-core-v3-bindconfig).
Making sure we can have proper support at both the downstream and upstream connection for Envoy is important for realizing
dual-stack support.

> In total the team has submitted over a dozen PRs to Envoy and are working on a least a half dozen more to make Envoy adoption of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In total the team has submitted over a dozen PRs to Envoy and are working on atleast a half dozen more to make Envoy adoption of
```

dual stack easier for Istio.

Meanwhile, on the Istio side you can track the progress in [Issue #40394](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40394).
Progress has slowed down a bit lately as we continue working with Envoy on various issues, however, we are happy to
announce experimental support for dual stack in Istio 1.17!

### Get involved

> Plenty of work remains and you can help track the work remaining for dual stack to get to alpha [here](https://github.com/istio/enhancements/pull/141).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Plenty of work remains and you are welcome to help us with the remaining tasks needed for dual stack support to get to Alpha [here](https://github.com/istio/enhancements/pull/141).
```

Progress has slowed down a bit lately as we continue working with Envoy on various issues, however, we are hoping to get
this resolved before Istio 1.17 launches in February.

> It is our hope that for Istio 1.17 we are able to get rudimentary support for dual-stack working. Iris Ding (Intel) and

Reviewer 4: i thought all the changes are in already?

Author: Not all of the changes made it. @zhlsunshine what changes are left?

Reviewer 8: Hi @jacob-delgado & @kfaseela,  please refer to https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/41248 for some still need to be done. Such as headless service and service entry.

Reviewer 4: @zh;sunshine @jacob-delgado I believe most of the things are already done, except the above. And 1.17 release is approaching soon. Then please reword the blog wherever you mention "We hope to have things in 1.17". Better to word it as majority of the dual stack support is present in 1.17.. and we merge the blog along with the release. You can quote the above issue in a Known Issues section

Reviewer 8: > Not all of the changes made it. @zhlsunshine what changes are left?

Hi @jacob-delgado, sorry for the misunderstanding. I think all is okay

Author: I'm rewriting this section. I'll put up a PR up shortly.
